LogJam
======
LogJam is a library that attempts to allow for the aggregation the distributing
logger facilities across a range of classes. Goals in creating this library
were...

   * Easy of use. Fall back on defaults as much as possible and allow the
     functionality to be integrated and used with the least amount of work.
     
   * Flexibility. After easy of use is taken into consideration it should be
     possible to use the library in a more advanced fashion if that is called
     for.
     
   * Minimize the code to use it. It shouldn't require a great deal of code to
     deploy or use the facilities and there should be no code required to pass
     entities such as loggers around.
     
   * Usable in libraries. I found myself writing a lot of common logging code
     when writing libraries and application and wanted to abstract that out. I
     wanted to minimize the burden this placed on library users at the same
     time.

Configuration & Setup
---------------------
The LogJam library is configured through a call to the configure() method on the
LogJam module. This method accepts a single parameter that may be either a
String, a Hash, an IO object or nil.

If you pass a String in this is expected to contain the path and name of a file
that contains the logging configuration. Logging configuration files can be
provided in either YAML or JSON format. If you pass an IO object this is
expected to be the source of the configuration and, again, this configuration
should be in either YAML or JSON format. In either case, where a String or IO
is specified, the data read must be translatable into a Hash, which brings us
to the other type that the configure() method accepts as a parameter.

A Hash passed to the configure() method is expected to contain a set of values
that can be converted into a logging set up. Passing an empty Hash will result
in set up containing a single, universal logger attached to the standard output
stream being created and used by all classes that have LogJam functionality.

The Hash passed to the configure() method can contain two keys that the library
will recognise and use. The first of these is 'loggers', in either Symbol or
String form. The value under the loggers key is expected to be an Array
containing zero or more logger definitions. A logger definition is a Hash in
which the following keys are recognised (either as Strings or Symbols)...

   Key                       Description
   -----------------------   --------------------------------------------------
   default                   A boolean indicating whether this logger is the
                             default (i.e. the one to be used when no other
                             fits the bill).
   datetime_format           The date/time format to be used by the logger. See
                             the documentation for the standard Ruby Logger
                             class for more details.
   file                      The path and name of the file that logging details
                             will be written to. Two special values are
                             recognised in this value. STDOUT and STDERR are
                             translated to mean the standard output or error
                             streams respectively.
   level                     The logging level to set on the logger.
   max_size                  When rotation is set to an integer value this value
                             can be set to indicate the maximum permitted file
                             size for a log file.
   name                      The name to associate with the logger. This allows
                             loggers to be tied to classes or for the creation
                             of aliases that tie multiple names to a single
                             logger.
   rotation                  The frequency with which the log file is rotated.
                             This may be an integer to indicate how many old log
                             files are retained or may be a String such as
                             "daily", "weekly" or "monthly".

A note on logger names. Logger names (including alias names) aren't hierarchical
and should be unique.

The second key recognised in the configuration Hash is 'aliases', again as
either a String or Symbol. The value under the aliases key is expected to be a
Hash that maps String keys to String values. The key values are expected to be
alias names and the mapped values are expected to be the name of a logger
declared in the logger section. An entry in the aliases Hash creates an alias
for an existing logger under a different name.

If you pass nil to the configure method it behaves in a slightly different
fashion. In this case the method searches for a configuration file that it can
use given a default set of files names (basically logging.yaml, logging.yml and
logging.json in the current working directory and in a subdirectory of the
current working directory called config). The first of these files that it finds
it attempts to use as configuration for the logging set up.

See the end of this document for some example configurations.

Logging With The Library
------------------------
The stated goals of the LogJam library are to avoid the need to pass Logger
instances around while still allowing potentially complex configuration with a
minimum of code. The first step in this process has been covered in the
Configuration & Setup section in which it's explained how to configure logging
from a single Hash or file. This section will provide details on how to deploy
loggers to various classes.

The LogJam library works by providing an extension to any class that uses it
that provides access to the logger to be used by the class. To make use of this
functionality a class must call the apply() method of the LogJam module. A
typical call to this method might look like...

   LogJam.apply(self, "my_logger")
   
This line would appear somewhere inside the definition for the class that will
use logging. The first parameter to the call is the class that is to be extended
with the LogJam functionality. The second parameter is the name of the logger
that the class will use. Note that this parameter is optional and, if not
specified or if a matching logger does not exist, the class will fall back in
using the default logger.

Once this line has been added to the class definition it will cause the class to
be extended with two methods - one called log() and one called log=(). The first
of these retrieves the Logger instance to be used by the class instances. The
second allows the Logger instance associated with a class to be altered.

The following complete (although contrived) example gives an overview of how
this would work...

   require 'rubygems'
   require 'logjam'
   
   class Writer
      LogJam.apply(self, "echo")
      
      def initialize(stream=STDOUT)
         @stream = stream
      end
      
      def echo(message)
         Writer.log.debug("Echoed: #{message}")
         @stream.puts message
      end
   end
   
   begin
      LogJam.configure({:loggers => [{:name => "echo",
                                      :file => "echo.log"}]})
                                      
      writer = Writer.new
      writer.echo "This is a string containing my message."
   rescue => error
      puts "ERROR: #{error}\n" + error.backtrace.join("\n")
   end

In this example we create a Writer class that can echo a String on a stream. In
doing this it also logs the message echoed at the debug level. We use the
LogJam.apply() method to extend this class with logging capabilities so that, in
the echo() method, we can simply call Writer.log() to get the class logger.

In the later section of the code we configure the LogJam system to have a single
Logger that writes to the echo.log file. We then create a Writer instance and
use it to write a simple message. This message should appear on the standard
output stream and be logged to the echo.log file.

Advanced Usage
--------------
The hope would be that this library can be used in the creation of other
libraries and allow for control of the logging generated by those libraries
without having to dig into the workings of the library or to pass around Logger
instances are constructor parameters or static data. In this case I recommend
explicitly declaring logger names when using the apply() method and making the
name that the library uses available with the library documentation so that the
libraries logging can be switched off or on as needed.

It's intended that, in general, the configure() method on the LogJam module
should only be called once. Calling it a second time will clear all existing
logging configuration and set up. This may or may not be an issue depending on
whether you decide to cache logger inside class instances instead of always
accessing them through the class level accessor.

The Logger instance returned from a LogJam are intended to be fully compatible
with the class defined within the standard Ruby Logger library. If you need to
change elements, such as the formatter, you should just do so on the logger in
the normal fashion. If you define multiple Logger instances then you will have
to change each individually.

Using the log=() method that is added to each class by the LogJam facilities it
is possible to change the Logger being used. If you want to use this method
please note that changing a Logger that is created via an alias will change the
original Logger and thereby affect all classes that make use of that Logger (and
not necessarily just the one making the change). If you want to do this give the
class it's own logger instance.

Finally, any logger can be fetched from the library using it's name and making
a call to the LogJam.get_logger() method. Note if you omit the name or pass in
nil you will retrieve the libraries default logger.

Example Configurations
----------------------
This section contains some example configurations. A short explanation is given
for each configuration and then the configuration itself in Hash, YAML and JSON
formats is provided.

This represents the most basic configuration possible. In passing an empty Hash
to the configure method the system creates a single, default logger that writes
everything on the standard output stream...

Hash
   {}
   
YAML
   ---
   {}

JSON
   {}

The following simple configuration writes all logging output to a file called
application.log in the current working directory. If a logging level is not
explicitly specified then DEBUG is the default...

Hash
   {:loggers => [{:default => true, :file => "application.log"}]}

YAML
   --- 
   :loggers: 
   - :default: true
     :file: application.log

JSON
   {"loggers": {"default": true, "file": "application.log"}}
   
This configuration declares two loggers. The first is called 'silent' and will
log nothing. The silent logger is the default and so will be used for any class
that doesn't have an explicitly named logger. The second is called 'verbose' and
logs everything from the debug level up on the standard output stream. The
configuration also declares an alias pointing the name 'database' to refer to
the verbose logger. An class that declares it uses the 'database' logger will
generate output while all others will be silenced.

Hash
   {:loggers => [{:default => true,
                  :file    => "STDOUT",
                  :level   => "UNKNOWN",
                  :name    => "silent"},
                 {:file    => "STDOUT",
                  :name    => "verbose"}],
    :aliases => {"database" => "verbose"}}

YAML
   --- 
   :loggers: 
   - :default: true
     :file: STDOUT
     :level: UNKNOWN
     :name: silent
   - :file: STDOUT
     :name: verbose
   :aliases: 
     database: verbose

JSON
   {"loggers": [{"default":true,
                 "file": "STDOUT",
                 "level": "UNKNOWN",
                 "name": "silent"},
                {"file": "STDOUT",
                 "name": "verbose"}],
    "aliases": {"database":"verbose"}}
